
created: 2021-06-23T23:43:15 (UTC -04:00)
tags: [[[covid-19]] [[pandemic]],corona[[virus]] [[pandemic]],[[covid-19]] policy,covid [[vaccine]]s,[[vaccine]] side effects,mrna [[vaccine]]s,biden administration,[[government]] transparency,herd [[immunity]],public health policy,Pharmaceuticals,Healthcare/Life [[Science]]s,Political/General [[News]],Respiratory Tract [[Disease]]s,Health,Immunizations,Medical Conditions,Outbreaks/Epidemics,Politics/International Relations,Domestic Politics,Novel Corona[[virus]]es,Infectious [[Disease]]s,Medical Treatments/Procedures,Content Types,Commentaries/Opinions,Factiva Filters,C&E Executive [[News]] Filter,[[COVID-19]] PANDEMIC,CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC,[[COVID-19]] POLICY,COVID VACCINES,VACCINE SIDE EFFECTS,M[[RNA]] VACCINES,BIDEN ADMINISTRATION,GOVERNMENT TRANSPARENCY,HERD IMMUNITY,PUBLIC HEALTH POLICY,SYND,[[WSJ]]-PRO-[[WSJ]].com,Opinion,political,general news,respiratory tract diseases,health,immunizations,medical conditions,outbreaks,[[epidemic]]s,politics,international relations,domestic politics,novel corona[[virus]]es,infectious diseases,medical [[treatment]]s,procedures,content types,commentaries,opinions,factiva filters,c&e executive news filter,opinion,[[pharmaceuticals]],healthcare,life [[science]]s]
source: https://www.wsj.com/articles/are-covid-[[vaccine]]s-riskier-than-advertised-1[[1624]]38[[1749]]?mod=hp_opin_pos_1
author: Joseph A. Ladapo and Harvey A. Risch

Are Covid Vaccines Riskier Than Advertised? - [[WSJ]]

Excerpt
There are concerning trends on blood clots and low platelets, not that the authorities will tell you.


One remarkable aspect of the [[Covid-19]] [[pandemic]] has been how often unpopular scientific ideas, from the lab-leak theory to the efficacy of masks, were initially dismissed, even ridiculed, only to resurface later in mainstream thinking. Differences of opinion have sometimes been rooted in disagreement over the underlying [[science]]. But the more common motivation has been political.
Another reversal in thinking may be imminent. Some scientists have raised concerns that the safety risks of [[Covid-19]] [[vaccine]]s have been underestimated. But the politics of vaccination has relegated their concerns to the outskirts of scientific thinking—for now.
Historically, the safety of medications—including [[vaccine]]s—is often not fully understood until they are deployed in large populations. Examples include rofecoxib (Vioxx), a pain reliever that increased the risk of heart attack and stroke; antidepressants that appeared to increase suicide attempts among young [[adults]]; and an in[[flu]]enza [[vaccine]] used in the [[2009]]-10 swine [[flu]] [[epidemic]] that was suspected of causing febrile convulsions and narcolepsy in [[[[child]]ren]]. Evidence from the real world is valuable, as clinical trials often enroll patients who aren’t [[representative]] of the general population. We learn more about drug safety from real-world evidence and can adjust clinical recommendations to balance risk and benefits.
The Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System, or Vaers, which is administered by the Centers for [[Disease]] Control and Prevention and the Food and Drug Administration, is a [[database]] that allows [[American]]s to document adverse events that happen after receiving a [[vaccine]]. The [[FDA]] and [[CDC]] state that the [[database]] isn’t designed to determine whether the events were caused by a [[vaccine]]. This is true. But the data can nonetheless be evaluated, accounting for its strengths and weaknesses, and that is what the [[CDC]] and [[FDA]] say they do.
The Vaers data for [[Covid-19]] [[vaccine]]s show an interesting pattern. Among the 310 million [[Covid-19]] [[vaccine]]s given, several adverse events are reported at high rates in the days immediately after vaccination, and then fall precipitously afterward. Some of these adverse events might have occurred anyway. The pattern may be partly attributable to the tendency to report more events that happen soon after vaccination.
The [[database]] can’t say what would have happened in the absence of vaccination. Nonetheless, the large clustering of certain adverse events immediately after vaccination is concerning, and the silence around these potential signals of harm reflects the politics surrounding [[Covid-19]] [[vaccine]]s. Stigmatizing such concerns is bad for scientific integrity and could harm patients.
Four serious adverse events follow this arc, according to data taken directly from Vaers: low platelets (thrombocy[[top]]enia); noninfectious myocarditis, or heart inflammation, especially for those under 30; deep-vein thrombosis; and [[death]]. Vaers records 321 cases of myocarditis within five days of receiving a vaccination, falling to almost zero by 10 days. Prior [[research]] has shown that only a fraction of adverse events are reported, so the true number of cases is almost certainly higher. This tendency of underreporting is consistent with our clinical experience.
Analyses to confirm or dismiss these findings should be performed using large data sets of health-insurance [[companies]] and healthcare organizations. The [[CDC]] and [[FDA]] are surely aware of these data patterns, yet neither agency has acknowledged the trend.
The implication is that the risks of a [[Covid-19]] [[vaccine]] may outweigh the benefits for certain low-risk populations, such as [[[[child]]ren]], young [[adults]] and people who have recovered from [[Covid-19]]. This is especially true in regions with low levels of community spread, since the likelihood of illness depends on exposure risk.
And while you would never know it from listening to public-health officials, not a single published study has demonstrated that patients with a prior infection benefit from [[Covid-19]] vaccination. That this isn’t readily acknowledged by the [[CDC]] or Anthony [[Fauci]] is an indication of how deeply entangled [[pandemic]] politics is in [[science]].
There are, however, signs of life for scientific honesty. In [[May]], the Norwegian Medicines Agency reviewed case files for the first 100 reported [[death]]s of nursing-home residents who received the [[Pfizer]] [[vaccine]]. The agency concluded that the [[vaccine]] “likely” contributed to the [[death]]s of 10 of these residents through side effects such as fever and diarrhea, and “possibly” contributed to the [[death]]s of an additional 26. But this type of honesty is rare. And it is rare for any [[vaccine]] to be linked to [[death]]s, so this unusual development for [[m[[RNA]]]] [[vaccine]]s merits further investigation.
The [[battle]] to recover scientific honesty will be an uphill one in the U.S. Anti-Trump politics in the spring of [[2020]] mushroomed into social-media censorship. [[News]] reporting often lacked intellectual curiosity about the appropriateness of public-health guidelines—or why a vocal minority of scientists strongly disagreed with prevailing opinions. Scientists have advocated for or against [[Covid-19]] therapies while having financial relationships with product manufacturers and their foundation benefactors.
Public-health authorities are making a mistake and risking the public’s trust by not being forthcoming about the possibility of harm from certain [[vaccine]] side effects. There will be lasting consequences from mingling political partisanship and [[science]] during the management of a public-health crisis.
Dr. Ladapo is an associate professor of medicine at UCLA’s David Geffen School of Medicine. Dr. Risch is a professor of epidemiology at Yale School of [[Public Health]].
Evidence that the corona[[virus]] may have escaped from the [[Wuhan]] Institute of Virology catches up to [[Fauci]] and other [[Wuhan]] Covid deniers, despite suspicious facts that have been apparent from the start. Image: Johannes Eisele/AFP via Getty Images
Copyright ©[[2020]] Dow Jones & Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 87990cbe856818d5eddac44c7b1cdeb8