created: 2021-06-23T21:34:14 (UTC -04:00)
tags: [Corona [[virus]]   [[vaccine]] s, COVID -19, COVID -19  [[vaccine]] s,Vaccines,Pharmaceutical industry,Pharmaceutical  [[companies]] ,National Institutes of Health ( [[NIH]] ),Biotechnology,Intellectual  [[property]] ,National Institute of Allergy and Infectious  [[Disease]] s (NIAID),Patents, [[Moderna]] ,Visuals,Illustrations,Axios License]
source: https://www.axios.com/moderna-nih- corona [[virus]] - [[vaccine]] -ownership-agreements-22051c42-2dee-4b19-938d-099afd71f6a0.html
author: Bob Herman
The  [[NIH]]  claims joint ownership of  [[Moderna]] 's  corona [[virus]]   [[vaccine]]  - Axios
Excerpt
Taxpayers have a sizable stake in the  [[vaccine]]   [[Moderna]]  is developing.
The National Institutes of Health may own intellectual  [[property]]  that undergirds a leading  corona [[virus]]   [[vaccine]]  being developed by  [[Moderna]] , according to documents obtained by Axios and an analysis from Public Citizen.
Why it matters: Because the federal  [[government]]  has an actual stake in this  [[vaccine]] , it could try to make the  [[vaccine]]  a free or low-cost public good with wide distribution, if the product turns out to be safe and effective.
The big picture: The  [[NIH]]  mostly funds outside  [[research]] , but it also often invents basic scientific technologies that are later licensed out and incorporated into  [[drugs]]  that are sold at massive profits. The agency rarely claims ownership stakes or pursues patent rights, but that appears to be different with this  corona [[virus]]   [[vaccine]] .
"We do have some particular stake in the intellectual  [[property]] " behind  [[Moderna]] 's  corona [[virus]]   [[vaccine]] ,  [[NIH]]  Director Francis Collins said during an Economic Club interview in  [[May]] .
Driving the news: New evidence shines light on the extent of  [[NIH]] 's involvement.
[[NIH]]  and  [[Moderna]]  have  [[research]] ed  corona [[virus]] es, like MERS, for several years, and signed a contract this past  [[December]]  that stated "m [[RNA]]   corona [[virus]]   [[vaccine]]  candidates [are] developed and jointly owned" by the two parties. The contract was not specific to the novel  corona [[virus]] , and it was signed before the new  [[virus]]  had been sequenced.
Separately, four  [[NIH]]  scientists have filed for a provisional patent application entitled " [[2019]] -nCoV  [[vaccine]] ," according to disclosures in a pending scientific paper.  [[Moderna]]  scientists co-authored that paper, but none are listed as  [[vaccine]]  co-inventors.
That makes it clear "the  [[government]]  and the public have a stake" in the  corona [[virus]]   [[vaccine]] , said Zain Rizvi, a health law and policy  [[research]] er at Public Citizen. "The  [[vaccine]]  would not exist without the intellectual contributions of federal scientists."
What they're saying:  [[NIH]]  said in a statement that its scientists created the "stabilized  corona [[virus]]  spike proteins for the development of  [[vaccine]] s against  corona [[virus]] es, including SARS-CoV-2," and the  [[government]]  consequently has "sought patents to preserve the  [[government]] 's rights to these inventions."
Further,  [[NIH]]  "has adopted a non-exclusive licensing approach for these patent rights in order to allow multiple  [[vaccine]]  developers" to make a  [[vaccine]] .
 [[NIH]]  added that "federal employees listed as inventors on these patent applications assigned their rights to the U.S.  [[government]] . Accordingly, should the  [[United States]]  Patent and Trademark Office] and other national patent authorities grant the patents, the U.S.  [[government]]  will hold ownership interest in the patents."
 [[Moderna]]  declined to comment beyond a statement, which said the  [[company]]  "has a broad owned and licensed IP estate" and is "not aware of any IP that would prevent us from commercializing our product candidates, including" the  corona [[virus]]   [[vaccine]] .
Between the lines: Rizvi said co-owning the  [[vaccine]]  could allow  [[NIH]]  to more broadly license the underlying technology to other  [[vaccine]]  manufacturers "without the consent of  [[Moderna]] ," a  [[company]]  that is valued at $25 billion despite having no federally approved  [[drugs]]  on the market.
The bottom line: Many experts anticipate a  corona [[virus]]   [[vaccine]] , once proven safe and effective, would be made as widely available as possible, and that developers aren't likely to seek big profits from it. Partial federal ownership could be a backs[[top]] if those assumptions don't bear out, but  [[NIH]]  isn't keen on stepping on industry's toes.
"Talking to the  [[companies]] , I don't hear any of them say they think this  [[vaccine]] ] is a money-maker," Collins said during his Economic Club interview. "I think they want to recoup their costs and maybe make a tiny percentage of increase of profit over that, like single digits percentage-wise, but that's it. Nobody sees this as a way to make billions of dollars."
